so this video is about a star known as
Schultz's star quite an interesting case
let's have a look at it Schultz's star
was only recently discovered 2013 in
fact so uh it's not been known for very
long at all but just within two years
something interesting came up it's a
very dim Red Dwarf star it's 22 light
years away from the Sun and it's moving
away from us and uh there's a little
image of it there for you you can find
it if you really want to lurking in the
constellation of monoceros the Unicorn
which is between Orion and his two
hunting dogs the Canis Major and canis
minor constellations so you can draw a
line roughly between Sirius and prion
and it's just there where I've marked it
with a little red star on the star map
here so what do we know about this star
well it's an M9 class Red Dwarf that
makes it the
faintest character class of star of the
lot these star classes go from O So I go
o b a f
g K and M in that order it used to be
alphabetical when it was first created
but it's been reorganized in order of
temperature so the O class stars are the
very hot ones and then you come down you
get to gclass like the sun as a yellow
dwarf star orange dwarfs at K and then
red dwarfs the faintest of the lot are
Class
M and within that you have 0 to n where
zero is the hotter end of the class and
nine the faintest weakest end so 9 is
the faintest of the
lot and the reason for that of course is
it's very small its mass is just 9 and a
half% of that of our sun that makes it
only 86 times the mass of Jupiter just
barely large enough to have triggered
nuclear fusion inside its core you have
to have enough Mass to create the
pressure and the temperature of 10
million de
Kelvin that is capable of ramming
hydrogen nuclei together hard enough to
trigger off the chain of nuclear
reactions that leads to helium and
creates the energy that powers the
star now small as it
is Schultz's star has a companion but
this isn't a star at all really it's a
failed star a brown dwarf this is just
an artist's impression I should point
out and this companion was detected soon
after the main star you can see it using
the wise telescope the wide infrared
survey uh
instrument and the reason for that is
that it's warm enough to Glow in the
infrared but it's not actually warm
enough to really put out any light at
all in the visible part of the
spectrum it's just under the crucial
amount to have turned into a proper star
it's 65 times the mass of Jupiter so the
main star was 86 this is 65 and the cut
off point for being a proper star is 75
in between if you look at uh the
gradation of objects of different masses
from the earth down at the bottom
Jupiter the gas giant then are brown
dwarf one of these objects like the
companion star a red dwarf and then our
sun I've labeled them up here with the
equivalent mass in terms of Jupiter
masses so the sun is just over a
thousand Jupiter masses
1050 a red dwarf star might be anywhere
between 75 and
500 times the mass of Jupiter the orange
stars would be in that
500 and and up range but the cut off
point is 75 below that you have one of
these Brown dwarves and they're classif
IED as brown dwarfs in the range 13
times the mass of Jupiter to 75 times so
you would have have to stack quite a lot
of Jupiters together in order to uh
really classify it as a brown dwarf
rather than just a gas
giant so what's the difference well
really the brown dwarfs are able to
carry out a little bit of nuclear fusion
inside that warms them up and so their
surface temperature can be up to 900°
Centigrade uh 900 Kelvin similar sort of
levels um Jupiter is about 125 so pretty
cold actually much colder than room
temperature but there's not enough
temperature and pressure to trigger that
first step where you ram the two
hydrogen nuclei the two protons at the
top there in two columns uh we're
ramming them together and making two
particle nucleus called dyum that's what
happens inside the cores of bigger Stars
proper stars but there's just not enough
heat and pressure to overcome the
resistance caused by the fact that the
two protons are positively charged and
repel each other through the
electromagnetic
force but around one part in 10,000 of
the hydrogen that was made in the Big
Bang turned out to be dyum that second
step fuel there one Neutron and one
proton together the heavy isotope of
hydrogen and that's just enough that
inside these Brown dwarfs you can stick
a proton and a dyum together and make
helium 3 that second stage in the
process that extra Neutron helps to
overcome the natural repulsion of the
two positive charges uh the strong force
that binds the nuclei together is Just a
Little Bit Stronger in dyum and so
there's more chance that that Fusion
happens and there's enough temperature
in these guys to do that of course
there's not very much fuel there's only
one part in 10,000 as much dyum um and
so they don't manage to do this for very
long but they can derive energy for a
few million years after their formation
and that of course heats up the core to
um fairly significant temperatures and
then that once it stops has to radiate
away to space and so they then begin
cooling down again um but it takes a
long time for an object of that size to
significantly cool so the result of this
is they're not hot enough to Glow at
3,000 de and look red like like a red
dwarf star would but if you had infrared
eyes you would definitely see them
because they are
significantly higher temperatures than
much of the coldness of space so our
infrared telescopes are quite good at
picking them
up now the two are orbiting around each
other the orbital distance is about
point8 of an astronomical unit the Earth
Sun distance that's about the same as
Venus orbiting around our sun but
there's much less mass in the system
these are very small objects by compared
to the Sun so it actually takes four
years to orbit around at that distance
uh rather than about 2third of a year
which Venus takes um we can actually use
the distance between them and the
observations of that and the period that
they take to go around we can plug those
in and get a very good estimate of the
mass
uh using Kepler's thirdd Law you plug
that in work it backwards you can
actually measure the the mass it's very
useful when we find two objects orbiting
each other for estimating that so what's
really interesting about this star well
the fact that it made a close approach
to the sun about 70,000 years ago it
passed by the sun within 100,000
astronomical units now 100,000 time
times the Earth's sun distance well
that's a long way Neptune is only 30 AU
from the Sun um but this does bring it
to be the record holder the closest
Encounter of the lot less than a light
year 0.86 light years away so the
nearest star at the moment Proxima
centuri in the alpha centuri group
that's 4.2 light years away so a 0.6 Au
uh Lightyear roach was very close
indeed and significantly that flyby that
it carried out back 70,000 years ago
would have brought it within the realm
of the earth Cloud this theoretical as
yet unobserved reservoir of literally
trillions of comets and icy bodies that
are thought to lie in a roughly
spherical distribution around around the
outer reaches of the sun's gravitational
influence in this body that we call the
O Cloud there's a diagram of it there
showing that the or Cloud goes out to
about 50,000 astronomical units maybe
even further as it gradually thins out
and shorty star would have been close
enough to have gravitationally
interacted with and Disturbed the bodies
in the outer part of the earth Cloud as
it whizzed through uh on its path
independently around the uh
Galaxy now when it did so it would have
scattered those comets some of them
would have been ripped away and hurled
out into deep space and others perhaps
tipped inwards down in towards the solar
system in towards the inner part of the
solar system even uh but things out
there happen relatively slowly the
gravity of the sun is quite weak so if
you tip a Comet inwards it will fall
inwards but it's such a long way it
might take a couple of million years to
actually come in all the way from the
earth Cloud uh down and become a a
proper Comet with a tail and everything
as it hurtles past the Sun and gets uh
very very much warmed up by the solar
radiation but we think that uh there's
pretty good evidence that Schultz star
did this we've been tracking the orbit
of about 300 comets slightly more than
that now and these have been shown to be
on very very long orbits that come from
Way Beyond the orbit of
Neptune and they're coming
in with what you might describe as a
nonrandom distribution the the orbits
point back towards having originated
from a radiant
point where we think Schultz's star
would have interacted and passed by the
outer edge of the or Cloud so it does
look like this really did happen and
that these objects have been H in
towards us um uh hopefully they won't
all arrive at once and it'll be in two
million years time and we'll be able to
worry about it
then but in the process of searching for
it we found quite a few of these uh
other objects that have been on proper
Interstellar trajectories so not
visitors from the art cloud but visitors
from other stars art clouds if you like
that have been previously ripped away
from those uh distributions and
wandering the Galaxy all on their own
and there's a few examples here the
bottom left one is omua mua which passed
through the solar system and we only saw
it as it was leaving quite worryingly it
came into the inner solar system on one
of these hyperbolic orbits it's moving
at tremendous speed um and then at the
top left we've got Comet mnau which is
also thought to have been uh coming from
deep space and Comet Isen there at the
bottom right on these long hyperbolic
uncaptured orbits so it's interesting
that the search for these uh very long
period comets has started turning up
some of these objects here's another one
this is
Comet uh c99
6 B2
aaki and uh this is probably an
Interstellar object as well this is a
long exposure photograph so the stars
have trailed slightly but uh this came
past in
1996 so this close approach of the star
to such sort of nearby distances just
086 of a light
year The Story Goes that early man
perhaps uh living in Africa perhaps just
on the cusp of leaving Africa for the
first time might have been able to see
Schultz's star in the night sky um as a
second sun if you like well that's very
nice idea but if you do the maths you
find that a red dwarf star of that
brightness and remember Schultz's star
is about as dim as you could possibly be
and still be a
star well it would have worked out
magnitude 11 now the faintest you can
see is magnitude six the scale goes from
first magnitude the bright stars second
third fourth fifth sixth the faintest
ones that are visible to the naked eye
and even though early man wouldn't have
had any street lights or anything to
contend with polluting his night sky
magnitude 11 is a bit of a stretch uh
each step is a factor of 2 and a half so
five magnitudes is a factor of a 100
that we're off by however it has been
suggested that these little red dwarf
stars do suffer significant star flares
occasionally and maybe a star flare or
two would have gone off and a bright red
light might have appeared in the sky I
rather like that idea even though it's
probably not actually
true now it's been estimated that uh
schy star is not the only object to have
flown past our solar system
um we reckon a star comes within uh the
O Cloud about every 100,000 years and
that tips a few comets into the long
period orbits that we observe and uh
well to come really close like Schultz's
sted maybe it's a 10 milliony year
interval about a 100 times less often so
these things do probably happen from
time to time and they may result in a
occasional bombardments of the inner
solar system with comets and so
forth one such object is an orange dwarf
star called gleer
710 and this is coming our way it's
currently 62 light years away but this
orange star is heading in it's about 60%
of the mass of the Sun something like
that um and it will pass by at only
10,000 astronomic IAL units that's
really much closer than Schultz's star
but it's in 1.4 million years time
because it's got to travel those 62
light years to get here but when it does
that would be pretty spectacular shame I
won't be around to witness that be
rather nice to see a magnitude minus 2.7
star in the sky passing by the sun um
that's about uh as bright as any of the
planets except for Venus
managed to get that sort of minus 2
minus 3 magnitude be pretty
spectacular anyway thanks very much for
listening to this one and uh I hope to
see you tuning in again to one of my
other talks thanks very much